english training text
First: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/23/climate/nyt-climate-newsletter-2020-review.html
Second:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructed_language

Climate Fwd:
Our Best Reporting of 2020

Also this week: Women on the front lines of climate activism

By Veronica Penney

    Dec. 23, 2020

Welcome to the Climate Fwd: newsletter. The New York Times climate team emails readers once a week with stories and insights about climate change. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.
Image
Credit...Clockwise from top left, KC Nwakalor for The New York Times; Max Whittaker for The New York Times; Brian L. Frank for The New York Times; NASA/OIB/Jeremy Harbeck.

By The New York Times

It’s been a year of crises: a pandemic, economic turmoil, social upheaval. And running through it all, there was climate change.

Our 2020 climate coverage started with huge wildfires burning the coast of Australia, which had just marked its hottest, driest year on record. It was a running start. And the news never seemed to slow down.

Over the course of the year, we covered much of the world. To single out just a couple of our big projects: We reported from California, which recorded its own worst fire season this fall, driven in part by hot, dry conditions. Huge infernos scorched the landscape, devastating magnificent trees and wreaking havoc in the lives of millions of Americans. We also went to South America, where quarter of the world’s largest wetland was also consumed by flames.

Advertisement
Continue reading the main story

As those fires raged, polar ice melted, temperatures soared and a record number of storms formed and made landfall in the United States — the most ever in one year. The climate disasters that followed were not equally felt, with poor people and communities of color often bearing a disproportionate share of the damage.

    Gift Subscriptions to The Times, Cooking and Games. 

Starting at $25.

In politics, President Trump’s administration continued to reverse and revise environmental protections, even on the way out of office. Joseph R. Biden Jr. ran on the opposite environmental platform from President Trump: to refocus on climate change and environmental justice.

Now that he’s won, we’ll be watching to see what he’ll accomplish. Meanwhile, you can read more from our best coverage of the year.

See you next week for the final newsletter of 2020, the New Year’s edition.
Image
Asorahfaye Raybility, a student in Oakland, Calif., led a youth climate march in San Francisco last year.
Asorahfaye Raybility, a student in Oakland, Calif., led a youth climate march in San Francisco last year.Credit...James Tensuan for The New York Times
Women and climate activism: It’s not just Greta

By Veronica Penney

Next year will be critical for climate action. The coronavirus pandemic postponed climate talks sponsored by the United Nations in 2020, so delegates at the next meeting, in November, will have plenty to do. The United States will also return to the Paris Agreement next year. And, climate activists will be trying to make up lost ground.

Advertisement
Continue reading the main story

When they do, according to new research, you can expect to see a lot of young women.

The newest generation of climate activists in North America and Europe is increasingly female and more likely to take concrete action to combat climate change, according to a new study published in the journal Energy Research & Social Science. The paper marks one of the first efforts to quantify the shifting demographics of the climate movement.
Climate Fwd:: Our latest insights about climate change, with answers to your questions and tips on how to help.

Mark S. McCaffrey, one of the authors who is also the founder of Education, Communication and Outreach Stakeholders, a nonprofit group that aims to help people and organizations make informed climate decisions, noticed press coverage of tens of thousands of young people protesting in the streets of New York City in September of 2019 as part of Climate Week. Back in the 1980s, climate activists were predominantly white men. “I thought it would be an interesting opportunity to try to learn more about who the activists were because there’s very little research on who are climate activists,” Mr. McCaffrey said.

The paper was based on voluntary survey responses from 367 people in 66 countries who identified themselves as climate activists. Of the respondents over 65 years old, just one quarter were women. The proportion of female activists grew steadily in younger age groups. For those under age 25, two-thirds identified as female.

Many factors could be driving that demographic trend. Jean Boucher, a postdoctoral environmental sociologist at Arizona State University and another author on the study, said the women’s empowerment movement following the election of President Trump may have brought more politically engaged women into climate activism.

“Most activists are already active in something else, like immigration, or in anti-torture,” Dr. Boucher said, citing earlier research. “When you know how to protest, and you know how to organize, you can just change the theme of the protest.”

According to Lily Gardner, 17, a youth organizer for the Sunrise Movement in Kentucky, the increasing number of women in climate activism could be tied to a rejection of traditional power structures. She said she sensed an increasing recognition that outmoded colonial, imperialist and white supremacist beliefs had led to a “real feeling of domination over the earth.”
Editors’ Picks
George Clooney on ‘The Midnight Sky’ and Donald Trump
A Close Reading of Ariana Grande’s Engagement Announcement
Tad Jones Lived Alone in Nature, Until Nature Revolted
Continue reading the main story

Advertisement
Continue reading the main story

“The current climate crisis and an extractive economy feel very connected, to me, to systemic patriarchy,” Ms. Gardner said.

She said she had also noticed a shift in the climate movement away from preserving natural beauty for its own sake and toward valuing the health and lives of people. From her perspective, those concrete impacts of climate change are pulling young people into climate activism.

“We have an entire generation who is forced to reckon with this as they think about their future and what the possibilities are,” Ms. Gardner said.
Read this week’s top picks and join the climate conversation
Climate Change Legislation Included in Coronavirus Relief Deal
Dec. 21, 2020
Biden Introduces His Climate Team
Dec. 19, 2020
How climate change is affecting winter storms.
Dec. 17, 2020
Biden Picks Deb Haaland to Lead Interior Department
Dec. 17, 2020
Michael Regan, Biden’s E.P.A. Pick, Faces ‘Massive Reconstruction and Rebuilding’
Dec. 17, 2020
Wealthier, Whiter Areas Are More Likely to Get Help After Fires, Data Show
Dec. 16, 2020
Biden’s Twin Climate Chiefs, McCarthy and Kerry, Face a Monumental Task
Dec. 16, 2020

We’d love your feedback on this newsletter. We read every message, and reply to many! Please email thoughts and suggestions to climateteam@nytimes.com.

If you like what we’re doing, please spread the word and send this to your friends. You can sign up here to get our newsletter delivered to your inbox each week.

And be sure to check out our full assortment of free newsletters from The Times.

Veronica Penney is a reporter covering climate change and a member of the 2020 Times Fellowship class. @veronica_penney 

NEXT TEXT

Constructed language
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Conlang)
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about the creation of planned or artificial human languages. For information about linguistic field of language planning and policy, see language planning. For languages that naturally emerge in computer simulations or controlled psychological experiments with humans, see artificial language. For language with a high morpheme-per-word ratio, see synthetic language.
The Conlang Flag, a symbol of language construction created by subscribers to the CONLANG mailing list which represents the Tower of Babel against a rising sun.[1]

A constructed language (sometimes called a conlang)[2] is a language whose phonology, grammar, and vocabulary, instead of having developed naturally, are consciously devised. Constructed languages may also be referred to as artificial languages, planned languages or invented languages[3] and in some cases, fictional languages. Planned languages are languages that have been purposefully designed. They are the result of deliberate controlling intervention, thus of a form of language planning.[4]

There are many possible reasons to create a constructed language, such as to ease human communication (see international auxiliary language and code); to give fiction or an associated constructed setting an added layer of realism; for experimentation in the fields of linguistics, cognitive science, and machine learning; for artistic creation; and for language games. Some people make constructed languages simply because they like doing it.

The expression planned language is sometimes used to indicate international auxiliary languages and other languages designed for actual use in human communication. Some prefer it to the adjective artificial, as this term may be perceived as pejorative. Outside Esperanto culture, the term language planning means the prescriptions given to a natural language to standardize it; in this regard, even a "natural language" may be artificial in some respects, meaning some of its words have been crafted by conscious decision. Prescriptive grammars, which date to ancient times for classical languages such as Latin and Sanskrit, are rule-based codifications of natural languages, such codifications being a middle ground between naïve natural selection and development of language and its explicit construction. The term glossopoeia is also used to mean language construction, particularly construction of artistic languages.[5]

Conlang speakers are rare. For example, the Hungarian census of 2011 found 8397 speakers of Esperanto,[6] and the census of 2001 found 10 of Romanid, two each of Interlingua and Ido and one each of Idiom Neutral and Mundolinco.[7] The Russian census of 2010 found that there were in Russia about 992 speakers of Esperanto (on place 120), nine of Ido, one of Edo, and none of Slovio or Interlingua.[8]
Contents

    1 Planned, constructed, artificial
    2 Overview
    3 A priori and a posteriori languages
        3.1 A priori language
            3.1.1 Examples of a priori languages
                3.1.1.1 International auxiliary languages
                3.1.1.2 Experimental languages
                3.1.1.3 Artistic languages
        3.2 A posteriori language
            3.2.1 Examples of a posteriori languages
                3.2.1.1 Artistic languages
                3.2.1.2 Controlled auxiliary languages
                3.2.1.3 International auxiliary languages
                3.2.1.4 Zonal auxiliary languages
    4 History
        4.1 Ancient linguistic experiments
        4.2 Early constructed languages
        4.3 Perfecting language
        4.4 17th and 18th century: advent of philosophical languages
        4.5 19th and 20th centuries: auxiliary languages
        4.6 Artlangs
    5 Ownership of constructed languages
    6 Modern conlang organizations
    7 See also
    8 Notes
    9 References
    10 External links

Planned, constructed, artificial

The terms "planned", "constructed", and "artificial" are used differently in some traditions. For example, few speakers of Interlingua consider their language artificial, since they assert that it has no invented content: Interlingua's vocabulary is taken from a small set of natural languages, and its grammar is based closely on these source languages, even including some degree of irregularity; its proponents prefer to describe its vocabulary and grammar as standardized rather than artificial or constructed. Similarly, Latino sine flexione (LsF) is a simplification of Latin from which the inflections have been removed. As with Interlingua, some prefer to describe its development as "planning" rather than "constructing". Some speakers of Esperanto and Esperantidos also avoid the term "artificial language" because they deny that there is anything "unnatural" about the use of their language in human communication.

By contrast, some philosophers have argued that all human languages are conventional or artificial. François Rabelais's fictional giant Pantagruel, for instance, said: "It is a misuse of terms to say that we have natural language; languages are through arbitrary institutions and the conventions of peoples: voices, as the dialecticians say, don't signify naturally, but capriciously."[9]

Furthermore, fictional or experimental languages can be considered naturalistic if they model real world languages. For example, if a naturalistic conlang is derived a posteriori from another language (real or constructed), it should imitate natural processes of phonological, lexical, and grammatical change. In contrast with languages such as Interlingua, naturalistic fictional languages are not usually intended for easy learning or communication. Thus, naturalistic fictional languages tend to be more difficult and complex. While Interlingua has simpler grammar, syntax, and orthography than its source languages (though more complex and irregular than Esperanto or its descendants), naturalistic fictional languages typically mimic behaviors of natural languages like irregular verbs and nouns, and complicated phonological processes.
Overview

In terms of purpose, most constructed languages can broadly be divided into:

    Engineered languages (engelangs /ˈɛnd͡ʒlæŋz/), further subdivided into logical languages (loglangs), philosophical languages and experimental languages; devised for the purpose of experimentation in logic, philosophy, or linguistics;[10]
    Auxiliary languages (auxlangs) devised for international communication (also IALs, for International Auxiliary Language);[10]
    Artistic languages (artlangs) devised to create aesthetic pleasure or humorous effect, just for fun; usually secret languages and mystical languages are classified as artlangs.[10]

The boundaries between these categories are by no means clear.[11] A constructed language could easily fall into more than one of the above categories. A logical language created for aesthetic reasons would also be classifiable as an artistic language, which might be created by someone with philosophical motives intending for said conlang to be used as an auxiliary language. There are no rules, either inherent in the process of language construction or externally imposed, that would limit a constructed language to fitting only one of the above categories.

A constructed language can have native speakers if young children learn it from parents who speak it fluently. According to Ethnologue, there are "200–2000 who speak Esperanto as a first language". A member of the Klingon Language Institute, d'Armond Speers, attempted to raise his son as a native (bilingual with English) Klingon speaker.[12][verification needed]

As soon as a constructed language has a community of fluent speakers, especially if it has numerous native speakers, it begins to evolve and hence loses its constructed status. For example, Modern Hebrew and its pronunciation norms were developed from existing traditions of Hebrew, such as Mishnaic Hebrew and Biblical Hebrew following a general Sephardic pronunciation, rather than engineered from scratch, and has undergone considerable changes since the state of Israel was founded in 1948 (Hetzron 1990:693). However, linguist Ghil'ad Zuckermann argues that Modern Hebrew, which he terms "Israeli", is a Semito-European hybrid based not only on Hebrew but also on Yiddish and other languages spoken by revivalists.[13] Zuckermann therefore endorses the translation of the Hebrew Bible into what he calls "Israeli".[14] Esperanto as a living spoken language has evolved significantly from the prescriptive blueprint published in 1887, so that modern editions of the Fundamenta Krestomatio, a 1903 collection of early texts in the language, require many footnotes on the syntactic and lexical differences between early and modern Esperanto.[15]

Proponents of constructed languages often have many reasons for using them. The famous but disputed Sapir–Whorf hypothesis is sometimes cited; this claims that the language one speaks influences the way one thinks. Thus, a "better" language should allow the speaker to think more clearly or intelligently or to encompass more points of view; this was the intention of Suzette Haden Elgin in creating Láadan, a feminist language[16] embodied in her feminist science fiction series Native Tongue.[17] A constructed language could also be used to restrict thought, as in George Orwell's Newspeak, or to simplify thought, as in Toki Pona. In contrast, linguists such as Steven Pinker argue that ideas exist independently of language. For example, in the book The Language Instinct, Pinker states that children spontaneously re-invent slang and even grammar with each generation. These linguists argue that attempts to control the range of human thought through the reform of language would fail, as concepts like "freedom" will reappear in new words if the old words vanish.

Proponents claim a particular language makes it easier to express and understand concepts in one area, and more difficult in others. An example can be taken from the way various programming languages make it easier to write certain kinds of programs and harder to write others.

Another reason cited for using a constructed language is the telescope rule, which claims that it takes less time to first learn a simple constructed language and then a natural language, than to learn only a natural language. Thus, if someone wants to learn English, some suggest learning Basic English first. Constructed languages like Esperanto and Interlingua are in fact often simpler due to the typical lack of irregular verbs and other grammatical quirks. Some studies have found that learning Esperanto helps in learning a non-constructed language later (see propaedeutic value of Esperanto).

Codes for constructed languages include the ISO 639-2 "art" for conlangs; however, some constructed languages have their own ISO 639 language codes (e.g. "eo" and "epo" for Esperanto, "jbo" for Lojban, "ia" and "ina" for Interlingua, "tlh" for Klingon, and "io" and "ido" for Ido).

One constraint on a constructed language is that if it was constructed to be a natural language for use by fictional foreigners or aliens, as with Dothraki and High Valyrian in the Game of Thrones series, which was adapted from the A Song of Ice and Fire book series, the language should be easily pronounced by actors, and should fit with and incorporate any fragments of the language already invented by the book's author, and preferably also fit with any personal names of fictional speakers of the language.
A priori and a posteriori languages

An a priori constructed language is one whose features (including vocabulary, grammar, etc.) are not based on an existing language, and an a posteriori language is the opposite.[10] This categorization, however, is not absolute, as many constructed languages may be called a priori when considering some linguistic factors, and at the same time a posteriori when considering other factors.
A priori language

An a priori language (from Latin a priori, "from the former") is any constructed language of which all or a number of features are not based on existing languages, but rather invented or elaborated as to work in a different way or to allude different purposes. Some a priori languages are designed to be international auxiliary languages that remove what could be considered an unfair learning advantage for native speakers of a source language that would otherwise exist for a posteriori languages. Others, known as philosophical or taxonomic languages, try to categorize their vocabulary, either to express an underlying philosophy or to make it easier to recognize new vocabulary. Finally, many artistic languages, created for either personal use or for use in a fictional medium, employ consciously constructed grammars and vocabularies, and are best understood as a priori.
Examples of a priori languages
International auxiliary languages

    Babm
    Kotava
    Ro
    Solresol
    Sona

Experimental languages

    Ithkuil
    Láadan

Artistic languages

    aUI by W. John Weilgart
    Dothraki and Valyrian from Game of Thrones
    Kēlen by Sylvia Sotomayor
    Klingon from the science-fiction franchise Star Trek
    The languages created by fantasy writer J. R. R. Tolkien

A posteriori language

An a posteriori language (from Latin a posteriori, "from the latter"), according to Louis Couturat, is any constructed language whose elements are borrowed from or based on existing languages. The term can also be extended to controlled versions of natural languages, and is most commonly used to refer to vocabulary despite other features. Likewise, zonal constructed languages (auxiliary languages for speakers of a particular language family) are a posteriori by definition.

While most auxiliary languages are a posteriori due to their intended function as a medium of communication, many artistic languages are fully a posteriori in design—many for the purposes of alternate history. In distinguishing whether the language is a priori or a posteriori, the prevalence and distribution of respectable traits is often the key.
Examples of a posteriori languages
Artistic languages

    Brithenig
    Trigedasleng from The 100
    Atlantean from Atlantis: The Lost Empire
    Wenedyk
    Toki Pona

Controlled auxiliary languages

    Basic English
    Globish
    Latino sine flexione
    Special English

International auxiliary languages

    Volapük
    Esperanto
    Glosa
    Ido
    Interlingua
    Interlingue
    Lingwa de planeta
    Lingua Franca Nova
    Sambahsa

Zonal auxiliary languages

    Folkspraak
    Interslavic

History
Ancient linguistic experiments

Grammatical speculation dates from Classical Antiquity, appearing for instance in Plato's Cratylus in Hermogenes's contention that words are not inherently linked to what they refer to; that people apply "a piece of their own voice... to the thing". Athenaeus of Naucratis, in Book III of Deipnosophistae, tells the story of two figures: Dionysius of Sicily and Alexarchus. Dionysius of Sicily created neologisms like menandros "virgin" (from menei "waiting" and andra "husband"), menekratēs "pillar" (from menei "it remains in one place" and kratei "it is strong"), and ballantion "javelin" (from balletai enantion "thrown against someone"). Incidentally, the more common Greek words for those three are parthenos, stulos, and akon. Alexarchus of Macedon, the brother of King Cassander of Macedon, was the founder of the city of Ouranopolis. Athenaeus recounts a story told by Heracleides of Lembos that Alexarchus "introduced a peculiar vocabulary, referring to a rooster as a "dawn-crier," a barber as a "mortal-shaver," a drachma as "worked silver"...and a herald as an aputēs [from ēputa "loud-voiced"]. "He once wrote something... to the public authorities in Casandreia...As for what this letter says, in my opinion not even the Pythian god could make sense of it." While the mechanisms of grammar suggested by classical philosophers were designed to explain existing languages (Latin, Greek, Sanskrit), they were not used to construct new grammars. Roughly contemporary to Plato, in his descriptive grammar of Sanskrit, Pāṇini constructed a set of rules for explaining language, so that the text of his grammar may be considered a mixture of natural and constructed language.
Early constructed languages
Page 68r of the Voynich manuscript. This three-page foldout from the manuscript includes a chart that appears astronomical.

A legend recorded in the seventh-century Irish work Auraicept na n-Éces claims that Fénius Farsaid visited Shinar after the confusion of tongues, and he and his scholars studied the various languages for ten years, taking the best features of each to create in Bérla tóbaide ("the selected language"), which he named Goídelc—the Irish language. This appears to be the first mention of the concept of a constructed language in literature.

The earliest non-natural languages were considered less "constructed" than "super-natural", mystical, or divinely inspired. The Lingua Ignota, recorded in the 12th century by St. Hildegard of Bingen is an example, and apparently the first entirely artificial language.[16] It is a form of private mystical cant (see also language of angels). An important example from Middle-Eastern culture is Balaibalan, invented in the 16th century.[5] Kabbalistic grammatical speculation was directed at recovering the original language spoken by Adam and Eve in Paradise, lost in the confusion of tongues. The first Christian project for an ideal language is outlined in Dante Alighieri's De vulgari eloquentia, where he searches for the ideal Italian vernacular suited for literature. Ramon Llull's Ars Magna was a project of a perfect language with which the infidels could be convinced of the truth of the Christian faith. It was basically an application of combinatorics on a given set of concepts.[vague][citation needed] During the Renaissance, Lullian and Kabbalistic ideas were drawn upon in a magical context, resulting in cryptographic applications. The Voynich manuscript may be an example of this.[citation needed]
Perfecting language

Renaissance interest in Ancient Egypt, notably the discovery of the Hieroglyphica of Horapollo, and first encounters with the Chinese script directed efforts towards a perfect written language. Johannes Trithemius, in Steganographia and Polygraphia, attempted to show how all languages can be reduced to one. In the 17th century, interest in magical languages was continued by the Rosicrucians and Alchemists (like John Dee and his Enochian). Jakob Boehme in 1623 spoke of a "natural language" (Natursprache) of the senses.

Musical languages from the Renaissance were tied up with mysticism, magic and alchemy, sometimes also referred to as the language of the birds. The Solresol project of 1817 re-invented the concept in a more pragmatic context.
17th and 18th century: advent of philosophical languages

The 17th century saw the rise of projects for "philosophical" or "a priori" languages, such as:

    Francis Lodwick's A Common Writing (1647) and The Groundwork or Foundation laid (or So Intended) for the Framing of a New Perfect Language and a Universal Common Writing (1652)
    Sir Thomas Urquhart's Ekskybalauron (1651) and Logopandecteision[18] (1652)
    George Dalgarno's Ars signorum, 1661
    John Wilkins' Essay towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language, 1668

These early taxonomic conlangs produced systems of hierarchical classification that were intended to result in both spoken and written expression. Leibniz had a similar purpose for his lingua generalis of 1678, aiming at a lexicon of characters upon which the user might perform calculations that would yield true propositions automatically, as a side-effect developing binary calculus. These projects were not only occupied with reducing or modelling grammar, but also with the arrangement of all human knowledge into "characters" or hierarchies, an idea that with the Enlightenment would ultimately lead to the Encyclopédie. Many of these 17th−18th centuries conlangs were pasigraphies, or purely written languages with no spoken form or a spoken form that would vary greatly according to the native language of the reader.[19]

Leibniz and the encyclopedists realized that it is impossible to organize human knowledge unequivocally in a tree diagram, and consequently to construct an a priori language based on such a classification of concepts. Under the entry Charactère, D'Alembert critically reviewed the projects of philosophical languages of the preceding century. After the Encyclopédie, projects for a priori languages moved more and more to the lunatic fringe.[citation needed] Individual authors, typically unaware of the history of the idea, continued to propose taxonomic philosophical languages until the early 20th century (e.g. Ro), but most recent engineered languages have had more modest goals; some are limited to a specific field, like mathematical formalism or calculus (e.g. Lincos and programming languages), others are designed for eliminating syntactical ambiguity (e.g., Loglan and Lojban) or maximizing conciseness (e.g., Ithkuil[16]).
19th and 20th centuries: auxiliary languages
Main article: International auxiliary language

Already in the Encyclopédie attention began to focus on a posteriori auxiliary languages. Joachim Faiguet de Villeneuve in the article on Langue wrote a short proposition of a "laconic" or regularized grammar of French. During the 19th century, a bewildering variety of such International Auxiliary Languages (IALs) were proposed, so that Louis Couturat and Léopold Leau in Histoire de la langue universelle (1903) reviewed 38 projects.

The first of these that made any international impact was Volapük, proposed in 1879 by Johann Martin Schleyer; within a decade, 283 Volapükist clubs were counted all over the globe. However, disagreements between Schleyer and some prominent users of the language led to schism, and by the mid-1890s it fell into obscurity, making way for Esperanto, proposed in 1887 by L. L. Zamenhof, and its descendants. Interlingua, the most recent auxlang to gain a significant number of speakers, emerged in 1951, when the International Auxiliary Language Association published its Interlingua–English Dictionary and an accompanying grammar. The success of Esperanto did not stop others from trying to construct new auxiliary languages, such as Leslie Jones' Eurolengo, which mixes elements of English and Spanish.

Loglan (1955) and its descendants constitute a pragmatic return to the aims of the a priori languages, tempered by the requirement of usability of an auxiliary language. Thus far, these modern a priori languages have garnered only small groups of speakers.

Robot Interaction Language (2010) is a spoken language that is optimized for communication between machines and humans. The major goals of ROILA are that it should be easily learnable by the human user, and optimized for efficient recognition by computer speech recognition algorithms.
Artlangs
Main article: Artistic language

Language can be artistic to the extent that artists use language as a source of creativity in art, poetry, calligraphy or as a metaphor to address themes as cultural diversity and the vulnerability of the individual in a globalizing world.

Some people prefer however to take pleasure in constructing, crafting a language by a conscious decision for reasons of literary enjoyment or aesthetic reasons without any claim of usefulness. Such artistic languages begin to appear in Early Modern literature (in Pantagruel, and in Utopian contexts), but they only seem to gain notability as serious projects beginning in the 20th century.[5] A Princess of Mars (1912) by Edgar Rice Burroughs was possibly the first fiction of that century to feature a constructed language. J. R. R. Tolkien developed families of related fictional languages and discussed artistic languages publicly, giving a lecture entitled "A Secret Vice" in 1931 at a congress. (Orwell's Newspeak is considered a satire of an IAL rather than an artistic language proper.)

By the beginning of the first decade of the 21st century, it had become common for science-fiction and fantasy works set in other worlds to feature constructed languages, or more commonly, an extremely limited but defined vocabulary which suggests the existence of a complete language, or whatever portions of the language are needed for the story, and constructed languages are a regular part of the genre, appearing in Star Wars, Star Trek, Lord of the Rings (Elvish), Stargate SG-1, Atlantis: The Lost Empire, Game of Thrones (Dothraki language and Valyrian languages), Avatar, Dune and the Myst series of computer adventure games.
Ownership of constructed languages

The matter of whether or not a constructed language can be owned or protected by intellectual property laws, or if it would even be possible to enforce those laws, is contentious.

In a 2015 lawsuit, CBS and Paramount Pictures challenged a fan film project called Axanar, stating the project infringed upon their intellectual property, which included the Klingon language, among other creative elements. During the controversy, Marc Okrand, the language's original designer expressed doubt as to whether Paramount's claims of ownership were valid.[20][21]

David J. Peterson, a linguist who created multiple well-known constructed languages including the Valyrian languages and Dothraki, advocated a similar opinion, saying that "Theoretically, anyone can publish anything using any language I created, and, in my opinion, neither I nor anyone else should be able to do anything about it."[22]

However, Peterson also expressed concern that the respective rights-holders—regardless of whether or not their ownership of the rights is legitimate—would be likely to sue individuals who publish material in said languages, especially if the author might profit from said material.

Furthermore, comprehensive learning material for such constructed languages as High Valyrian and Klingon has been published and made freely accessible on the language-learning platform Duolingo—but those courses are licensed by the respective copyright holders.[22] Because only a few such disputes have occurred thus far, the legal consensus on ownership of languages remains uncertain.
Modern conlang organizations

Various paper zines on constructed languages were published from the 1970s through the 1990s, such as Glossopoeic Quarterly, Taboo Jadoo, and The Journal of Planned Languages.[23] The Conlang Mailing List was founded in 1991, and later split off an AUXLANG mailing list dedicated to international auxiliary languages. In the early to mid-1990s a few conlang-related zines were published as email or websites, such as Vortpunoj[24] and Model Languages. The Conlang mailing list has developed a community of conlangers with its own customs, such as translation challenges and translation relays,[25] and its own terminology. Sarah Higley reports from results of her surveys that the demographics of the Conlang list are primarily men from North America and western Europe, with a smaller number from Oceania, Asia, the Middle East, and South America, with an age range from thirteen to over sixty; the number of women participating has increased over time.

More recently founded online communities include the Zompist Bulletin Board (ZBB; since 2001) and the Conlanger Bulletin Board. Discussion on these forums includes presentation of members' conlangs and feedback from other members, discussion of natural languages, whether particular conlang features have natural language precedents, and how interesting features of natural languages can be repurposed for conlangs, posting of interesting short texts as translation challenges, and meta-discussion about the philosophy of conlanging, conlangers' purposes, and whether conlanging is an art or a hobby.[5] Another 2001 survey by Patrick Jarrett showed an average age of 30.65, with the average time since starting to invent languages 11.83 years.[26] A more recent thread on the ZBB showed that many conlangers spend a relatively small amount of time on any one conlang, moving from one project to another; about a third spend years on developing the same language.[27]

    iconConstructed languages portal

See also

    List of constructed languages
    Interlinguistics
    Aboriginal constructed languages: Damin, Eskayan
    Idioglossia
    Cant (language)
    ISO, SIL, and BCP language codes for constructed languages
    Language construction
        Artificial script
        Langmaker
        Language Construction Kit
        Language game
        Language regulator
        List of language inventors
    Language modelling and translation
        Knowledge representation
        Language translation
        Metalanguage
        Universal grammar
    Mystical languages
        Glossolalia
        Language of the birds
    Spontaneous emergence of grammar
        Artificial language
        June and Jennifer Gibbons
        Nicaraguan Sign Language
        Origin of language
        Pidgin
        Poto and Cabengo
    Linguistic determinism
    Linguistic relativity
    Pasigraphy
    Universal language
    Basic English

Notes

Adrian Morgan (20 November 2006). "Conlanging and phonetics". The Outer Hoard. "The colours represent creative energy, and the layers of the tower imply that a conlang is built piece by piece, never completed. The tower itself also alludes to the Tower of Babel, as it has long been a tradition to demonstrate a constructed language by translating the Babel legend. The Conlang flag was decided on by a vote between many competing designs, and one of my own contributions to the conlanging world is that I was the person who facilitated this election. The winning design was drawn by Christian Thalmann, who introduced the layers. The idea of including the Tower of Babel on the flag had been introduced by Jan van Steenbergen, and the idea of placing the sun on the horizon behind it by Leland Paul. The idea of having the rising sun on the flag had been introduced by David Peterson, who saw it as representing the rise of conlanging from obscurity to popularity and notoriety."
Artificial languages are informally called conlangs (constructed languages), and the study of artificial languages and related matters is interlinguistics.
"Ishtar for Belgium to Belgrade". European Broadcasting Union. Retrieved 19 May 2013.
Klaus Schubert, Designed Languages for Communicative Needs within and between Language Communities, in: Planned languages and language planning (PDF), Austrian National Library, 2019
Sarah L. Higley: Hildegard of Bingen's Unknown Language. Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
"Hungarian Central Statistical Office". www.ksh.hu. Retrieved 2019-08-18.
"18. Demográfiai adatok – Központi Statisztikai Hivatal". www.nepszamlalas2001.hu. Archived from the original on 2018-06-17. Retrieved 2013-03-10.
"Kiom da esperantistoj en Ruslando? Ne malpli ol 992 - La Ondo de Esperanto". Dec 18, 2011.
François Rabelais, Œvres complètes, III, 19 (Paris: Seuil, 1973). Also cited in Claude Piron, Le Defi des Langues (L'Harmattan, 1994) ISBN 2-7384-2432-5.
Peterson, David (2015). The Art of Language Invention (1st ed.). Penguin Books. pp. 21–22. ISBN 978-0143126461.
The "Conlang Triangle" by Raymond Brown. Accessed 8 August 2008
Derian, James Der (Aug 1, 1999). "Hollywood at War: The Sequel" – via www.wired.com.
Hybridity versus Revivability: Multiple Causation, Forms and Patterns, Ghil'ad Zuckermann, Journal of Language Contact, Varia 2, pp. 40-67 (2009).
Let my people know! Archived 2011-09-16 at the Wayback Machine, Ghil'ad Zuckermann, Jerusalem Post, May 18, 2009.
Fundamenta Krestomatio, ed. L. L. Zamenhof, 1903; 18th edition with footnotes by Gaston Waringhien, UEA 1992.
Joshua Foer, "John Quijada and Ithkuil, the Language He Invented", The New Yorker, Dec. 24, 2012.
"My hypothesis was that if I constructed a language designed specifically to provide a more adequate mechanism for expressing women's perceptions, women would (a) embrace it and begin using it, or (b) embrace the idea but not the language, say "Elgin, you've got it all wrong!" and construct some other "women's language" to replace it." Glatzer, Jenna (2007). "Interview With Suzette Haden Elgin". Archived from the original on 2007-06-12. Retrieved 2007-03-20.
"Logopandecteision". uchicago.edu.
Leopold Einstein, "Al la historio de la Provoj de Lingvoj Tutmondaj de Leibnitz ĝis la Nuna Tempo", 1884. Reprinted in Fundamenta Krestomatio, UEA 1992 [1903].
Bhana,Yusuf, Can you copyright a language? Translate Media, June 6 2019
Gardner, Eriq, Crowdfunded 'Star Trek' Movie Draws Lawsuit from Paramount, CBS Hollywood Reporter, December 30 2015
Owen, Becky,Can you copyright a fictional language? Copyright Licensing Agency, 26 September 2019
"How did you find out that there were other conlangers?" Conlang list posting by And Rosta, 14 October 2007
Archives of Vortpunoj at Steve Brewer's website
Audience, Uglossia, and Conlang: Inventing Languages on the Internet by Sarah L. Higley. M/C: A Journal of Media and Culture 3.1 (2000). (Archived June 16, 2005, at the Wayback Machine, media-culture.org.au site sometimes has problems.)
"Update mailing list statistics—FINAL", Conlang list posting by Patrick Jarrett, 13 September 2001

    "Average life of a conlang" Archived 2011-06-14 at the Wayback Machine thread on Zompist Bulletin Board, 15 August 2008; accessed 26 August 2008.
    "Average life of a conlang" thread on Conlang mailing list, 27 August 2008 (should be archived more persistently than the ZBB thread)

References

    Eco, Umberto (1995). The search for the perfect language. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 0-631-17465-6.
    Comrie, Bernard (1990). The World's Major Languages. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-506511-5.
    Couturat, Louis (1907). Les nouvelles langues internationales. Paris: Hachette. With Léopold Leau. Republished 2001, Olms.
    Couturat, Louis (1910). Étude sur la dérivation dans la langue internationales. Paris: Delagrave. 100 p.
    Libert, Alan (2000). A priori artificial languages (Languages of the world). Lincom Europa. ISBN 3-89586-667-9.
    Okrent, Arika (2009). In the Land of Invented Languages: Esperanto Rock Stars, Klingon Poets, Loglan Lovers, and the Mad Dreamers Who Tried to Build A Perfect Language. Spiegel & Grau. pp. 352. ISBN 978-0-385-52788-0.
    Peterson, David (2015). The Art of Language Invention (1st ed.). Penguin Books. p. 22. ISBN 978-0143126461.
    "Babel's modern architects", by Amber Dance. The Los Angeles Times, 24 August 2007 (Originally published as "In their own words -- literally")

External links
	
This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Library resources about
Constructed language

    Resources in your library
    Resources in other libraries

Constructed language
at Wikipedia's sister projects

    Definitions from Wiktionary
    Media from Wikimedia Commons
    News from Wikinews
    Textbooks from Wikibooks
    Data from Wikidata

    Language Creation Society, a nonprofit dedicated to all forms of language creation.
    Constructed language at Curlie
    Conlang Atlas of Language Structures, a typological database of conlangs, based on the World Atlas of Language Structures.
    Blueprints For Babel, focusing on international auxiliary languages.
    ConWorkShop, a conlanging tools website, with documentation for over 5000 constructed languages.
    Garrett's Links to Logical Languages
    Department of Planned Languages Esperanto Museum of the Austrian National Library.
    The Conlanger's Library
    Henrik Theiling's (Con)Language Resources
    Jörg Rhiemeier's Conlang Page
    Create a sentence most people understand, by using common words between languages.

    vte

Constructed languages
Classification	

    Artistic
        Fictional Language game International auxiliary
        Zonal Engineered
        Experimental Musical Philosophical

Specific
languages
by group	
International
auxiliary	

    Babm Blissymbols Bolak Communicationssprache Esperanto
        Arcaicam Esperanto II Ido Mundolinco Reformed (1894) Romániço Other Esperantidoj Glosa
        Interglossa Guosa Idiom Neutral Intal Interlingua Interlingue International Sign Kotava Langue nouvelle Latino sine flexione Lingua Franca Nova Lingwa de planeta Mondial Neo Nal Bino Novial Pasilingua Sambahsa Solresol Sona Spokil Unish Universalglot Uropi Volapük

Zonal	

    Afrihili Efatese language Eurolengo N'Ko Pan-Germanic language
        Folkspraak Tutonish Pan-Slavic language
        Interslavic Slovio Pan-Romance language
        Romanid Sabir Runyakitara

Engineered	

    aUI Dutton Speedwords Ithkuil Kalaba-X Lincos Loglan Lojban Real Character Ro Toki Pona

Fictional and
other artistic	

    Asa'pili Atlantean Brithenig Dothraki Enchanta Kēlen Klingon
        grammar alphabets Kobaïan Láadan Loxian Lydnevi Middle-earth languages
        Adûnaic Quenya Sindarin more... Na'vi
        grammar Nadsat Star Wars languages Syldavian Teonaht Tsolyáni Valyrian Verdurian Wenedyk

Ritual and other	

    Balaibalan Damin Enochian Eskayan Lingua Ignota Medefaidrin Palawa kani Yerkish Zaum

Writing systems	

    Constructed script Esperanto orthography Tolkien's writing systems
        Cirth Sarati Tengwar

Related	

    Conlanging: The Art of Crafting Tongues Grammelot Relexification Zompist.com Langmaker

    Portal List of constructed languages List of language creators

Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	

    LCCN: sh85074581 NDL: 00574782

Categories:

    Constructed languagesInterlinguisticsLanguage

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Current events
    Random article
    About Wikipedia
    Contact us
    Donate

Contribute

    Help
    Learn to edit
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Upload file

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Cite this page
    Wikidata item

Print/export

    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikibooks
    Wikinews

Languages

    Deutsch
    Español
    Français
    Italiano
    Nederlands
    日本語
    Tagalog
    Tiếng Việt
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 13 December 2020, at 01:15 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

